family background as to geography, small towns, large towns, rich, poor, academic major, whatever, were the people that came to see you a cross-section of the student body?
Well, I would say reasonably.
You tended to get, given the College of Liberal Arts was much smaller than it is now,
But you tended to get a higher proportion of liberal arts majors.
Because, you know, their majors are English philosophy, who am I, where am I, what am I doing here, all of those.
You got less of, given the total number of students, you got less of a group of engineering students in.
And engineering, I hate to stereotype, a lot of engineering students operate very much from the neck up.
They can tell you exactly, in fact, I had a
a young man whose girlfriend broke up with him, and he kept saying, I don't think she should have, and I kept saying, well, when she did such and such, how did it make you feel
And he stopped me and he said, what does it make any difference what I felt?
And I said, well, in psychology, we have a feeling, a notion that your feelings are as valid a source of knowledge as your head is often.
And it might be helpful.
But anyway, yeah, you got a more disproportionate number from majors where
where people are in majors that are not as defined as mathematics and engineering and chemistry and all that kind of thing.
As far as their economic background, we really, when a student came to us, we really had no information on their socioeconomic status.
And as A&M grew, it became more of an institution where people came from large urban areas, so I'm sure that that was reflected in our data.
But I would say it was more, initially you got more of the male loading because males were the preponderance of the population, but it didn't take long to shift again to the female because women, it's okay for women in our society to use calcetic services more than men.
It's not a sign of weakness to them.
And then you got more of the difference in the academic majors and that.
At the end of say the first year, there must have been some kind of evaluation or feedback report you got from Koldis or somebody.
How did you feel at the end of the first measurement point?
In those days, I don't remember us being under the pressure of a formal annual performance review.
I don't remember John doing those with me.
With John, it wasn't very hard to know when you were doing fine because in my relationship with him,
he would kid around a lot and even do some put-down humor.
Like he'd introduce me to people and say, this is Wade Birch, Director of Student Counseling Services, and I screwed up and hired him twice, once at East Texas and one here.
If John didn't do that with me, I would get concerned and wonder, was I not doing something well?
But I don't remember Haskell any formal review.
He must have been picking up
information, because I know he would even ask me in our meetings, what was I hearing about the student center, what was I hearing around campus about this, that, and so I'm sure he was gathering information informally, but I never got a formal performance review back in those days.
Did he give you any verbal, hey, keep it up?
Oh, yeah, yes, absolutely, yeah, things are going well, yeah, and with John, John was
Like many of us, no news is good news.
There must have been some kind of salary increase that was performance-based, in fact.
Yeah, right.
I remember our first or second year here, the legislature gave us a mid-year
bonus or something, and I was heady with the amount of money.
I think I jumped to $25,000.
It was just astounding.
In your first two or three years, a work week was what?
Work week was clearly the university work week, eight to five, and then we very soon thereafter knew that we needed to share nighttime and weekend emergency duty.
And so initially, and John the second year gave me two more positions, so we were up to five, and so we set up a system where the health center would call us in a particular order, and we had an arrangement.
At home?
Yes.
And would you sometimes come to the campus?
Oh, absolutely.
What were the kinds of matters that would... Usually people suffering depression, extreme anxiety, suicidal ideation,
And they would have gone to the campus?
Yeah, and if they didn't go directly to the health center, they would make their presence known to somebody else who would get them to the health center.
Our whole system then was always, we preach this and talk, get them to the health center, get them to the health center.
The health center was open seven days a week, 24 hours a day at that point.
And that was good because then we could meet them on a Sunday afternoon or a Monday morning at 2 a.m.
because we had nurses and a physician around.
Other than that,
That changed after the health center terminated its seven day a week, 24 hour day services.
Now we have to have students taken down to the local hospital emergency rooms because I have no place to send our staff member in the middle of the night.
And I don't want a female staff psychologist seeing a kid in this building when it's dark.
Of course, we also have a major helpline.
With that night duty, can you give an extreme example of a serious and a goofy?
Oh, yeah.
I had one woman, a female student, who called me and I answered the phone.
I think it was around 3.20 a.m.
The health center had given my number and she called me.
One of the first words out of her mouth was, did I awaken you?
You know, the funny part of me, you know, internal was, well, no, I've been sitting here waiting for somebody's call.
You know, of course you did, you know.
And I said, well, I had, but I was very civil.
I said, well, I was sleeping, but I knew that people would call if they had need, you know, and that kind of thing.
But I always remember that.
I do remember...
also getting involved with another female student, I think a graduate student, older female student, who I had received word that she was threatening suicide, and I called the college station police to go out and do a welfare check.
And I had talked to her, and she would not give me, prior to them doing the welfare check, she would not give me any assurances over the phone that she would not harm herself.
That's when I called the college, and she hung up on me.
I called the college station police.
They went out, checked on her.
About 15, 10 minutes after she left, the police left, she called me and she cussed me out.
I mean, I've heard some words.
I think there was at least one cuss word I had not heard of before.
And man, she let me have it that I had sent the police out there.
And I remember telling her, I said, I need you to understand that in my life I have decided that I would rather have you angry at me than dead.
And I will now lay my head on the pillow tonight much more comfortably than I would have had I not taken that precaution.
Do you remember what her response to that was?
She was not very happy with me no matter what I said.
Not at all.
It was interesting.
I can imagine.
In those early years, did corps members tend to show up in the similar per capita?
No.
Less, much less and I think that's just a reflection of the A&M culture at that time and generally society.
I mean counseling was starting to really take off in the 60s and 70s but not to the degree it is today.
And campus students compared to off campus.
Oh, that began mirroring, reflecting whatever the demographics were of the university.
In subsequent years, it's amazing.
We see about an equal proportion of freshmen, sophomore, junior, and senior.
I would have expected a heavy loading of freshmen and sophomores, but we see a pretty equal spread, and then we'll see an equal number of graduate students.
So that's kind of interesting.
I think most people would think you'd see the younger students more.
If compared to other institutions, do you think that would be similar to the realities elsewhere?
Probably to a fair number of them, particularly residential campuses, yeah.
Yeah.
And let's see, were there any realities that you expected here that you didn't encounter?
Hmm, boy.
We'll need to do this, this, and this, and we'll need to help with that or that, but the situation didn't occur?
In preparing for things that never materialized?
For the kinds of problems that students would have that they didn't have here?
No, other than my somewhat noticing that the degree of academic competitiveness caused some greater stress, depression, and anxiety and
occasionally those things of stealing lab notes or preventing somebody from setting the curve, I think the A&M students with that increasing civilian population were not too dissimilar, other than I do remember distinctly how polite the students were, no sir, yes sir, which was always amazing to me.
But no, nothing that I, I don't remember anything that caught me off guard and that kind of thing.
See now, and to the student typist, this you need not put in there.
This is just a personal opinion coming up.
Sure.
I have the impression that this campus is more friendly than most, even today.
Yeah.
Whether it's male or female, civilian or military.
Yes.
But I'm guessing it's a chicken and egg.
I'm guessing the kind of kid that selects A&M in the first place.
Yeah.
comes from that kind of mental background that I'm glad it does.
I'm glad they're here.
Yes.
But I'm not sure A&M created it, but it helps to encourage that it continues.
Yeah.
Well, first response is there's no question the friendliness on this campus is marvelous.
And I hear some of the old ag saying, well, it's not as good as it used to be.
I don't know.
I don't know how you measure that.
I don't know if that's true, but it's an incredibly friendly and supportive place.
I go back up to the campus at Indiana University and I just naturally say hello to people on the sidewalk.
Even in the Midwest, we're not talking about the East, New York.
Even in the Midwest, my wife is nudging me and saying, hey, you know, you don't do that.
You don't do those.
People look at it like, what do you want, you know, kind of thing.
So it's incredible.
And the core, the kind of spirit they set up, which I think all of this flows from, bless them for that.
And I think you're right.
I think kids who are inclined to attach and otherwise become part of something are going to really be drawn to a school with this value system.
So in those early months and years, you didn't think about having made a mistake.
And how long did you think you'd be here?
Oh, well, at East Texas, I thought two or three years and I'd be back in Florida.
When I got to A&M and the chance to work with Coldus again, it was a different ball game.
Now, you just reminded me, I did apply for a job at University of Texas at San Antonio.
And they offered me the directorship, the same salary, and an associate professor rank, which I had an assistant professor rank here.
And, but the only reason I did that was I happened to have been single at that point.
And the social life here was devastatingly bad.
I, when I, East Texas State, the largest department in the university was the counseling department.
And East Texas State at that time was an inverted pyramid.
The graduate school was the largest part of it.
And then it funneled down.
So the dating opportunities and social life were wonderful there, even though it was a town of 9,000 and a school of 9,000.
And I thought when I came to A&M, oh, my goodness, it's just going to be better.
This is a bigger school, bigger place.
It was rough.
It was hard.
And so the only reason I ever did
do that was because I thought social opportunities would be much better in San Antonio.
I remember John Coldis was a bit taken aback that I had done that.
I think he took that a bit personally and I can understand that, you know, but it was purely social reasons.
But ultimately I was offered the job there and didn't take it because I knew professionally this was a far better place to be, far, far better.
And as far as meeting a woman in my life, it only takes one.
and so I clearly made the right choice.
How did you enlarge your social opportunities here other than softball?
Gee, gee, gee, gee.
Well, I do remember going, I remember, I don't remember that my social life became amazingly more rich here, to be honest with you.
Instead of going back to commerce every three or four weekends,
I found myself down in Houston every third weekend or so.
But then again, part of that was for shopping too at that time.
Byron College Station I think had a combined population of 50,000.
So I was down in Houston a lot for ball games and concerts and all those kinds of things.
I don't know that, I mean that group of softball friends, that got wider and wider.
Ron Blatchley and folks like that.
And that created a social circle, too.
Sort of the concentric rings went out.
And then student affairs people that I got to know.
That pretty much was the core of my social life.
You had an assistant professor.
What were your duties over there?
Oh, I just taught one course, one graduate course in counseling.
Per year?
Per semester.
Yeah.
And the interesting thing was that I was paid no more.
In those days, I wanted academic rank, I wanted to teach, and John said, fine, as long as you run the counseling service properly, you can certainly go do that.
And Ed Psych started off paying me one-third of my salary, then I got it reduced to one-fourth.
Boy, this is one of those ticklish things.
The faculty at that time were a different breed of cat for me.
And I guess this is true of academics.
We would keep hashing over the same issues.
I remember Lannis Hope.
I remember him putting his hands in his head one time and saying, folks, we've been talking about this for eight months.
Let's just do something.
And I was saying in my head, yes, Lannis, yes.
You know, and that kind of thing.
So I actually, what really happened primarily was this center began getting bigger and bigger and more complex to where I was working so many nights.
So it was getting crazy.
And I had to give up the teaching part.
When you did it, was that a good, for you professionally, was that a good outlet?
The teaching?
I really enjoyed teaching.
I enjoy the part of interacting with students.
I'll be candid with you.
I would rather deal with a student in suicidal crisis than I would read a term paper.
I mean, that's honest.
I'd rather take the unknown of a suicidal crisis over reading a term paper.
So the classroom part of it I really enjoyed a lot.
The preparation.
I had taught those courses before at East Texas State and at Indiana, and so I was pretty well prepared.
They had me teach the same class each time.
So, but I enjoyed it.
I did it for about four years.
See, I've always thought what a healthy thing it is to have the real world practitioner teach the course which is filled with theory.
Yes, totally agree.
This may be what the textbook says, however.
Yeah, right.
Oh, you're right on target.
All right, so you all were in the Y. Right.
And that lasted about how long?
We were in the YMCA building on different floors.
We bounced up and down until 1994.
Oh, so yeah.
Yeah, we were in there a long time.
We started out with a few corner offices and third floor.
Then as John got more positions, we took over part of the basement.
The basement was interesting because when we'd have serious rainfall, the counseling center would flood.
We'd have an inch or an inch and a half of water and a physical plant would come over with the water vacuums and our clients would be sloshing through the water.
Finally, it was very interesting to me that after we moved back up to the third floor, where we got the whole floor, right after that, I think Business Affairs or Human Resources got that, and all of a sudden the university dug out all the dirt around that area and fixed it all up to prevent flooding.
But while we were in it, maybe this is the Student Affairs feeling like the underdog, but it didn't happen while we were in there.
If I'm not mistaken, wasn't there, once upon a time in the deep past, an indoor swimming pool?
Yes, there was a pool.
Yep.
You could walk over the floor and hear the resonance was different.
That's what I thought.
Were there any signals from the president or the board or anybody on the outside that caused you to think that, okay, we are making progress and they recognize it?
Never really.
I'll be honest with you, Haskell.
I have always had kind of a, and this is not necessarily good, I've always had a somewhat of an arms length cautious relationship with college presidents and board members.
I've never gone out of my way to interact with them.
Oh, I understand.
Again, it's like the Morth getting too close to the flame.
But I never got any signal.
I always took my cues through John.
And I really did follow his advice of be careful, stay out of that stuff.
If something needs to be done or you need to know something, I'll let you know what it is.
And I trusted John just greatly.
And so it was amazing.
I remember one time during a budget hearing, and I don't know how high the A&M budget is when it's stacked, but it's pretty big.
And I remember John calling me.
on the phone and I was interrupted from some meeting and he said, he used to call me Wado and he said, Wado, he said, why did I agree to do this for your department?
You know, he needed a quick round.
And suddenly, I mean, I thought, my God, the Board of Regents,
You know, I viewed the counseling service as a pimple on the fanny of the institution.
You know, we were insignificant and small, and here he is calling from a board meeting, stepping out and saying, hey, I need the rationale for what we did.
So I was really surprised at that.
I don't even remember what the matter was, frankly, but I was surprised.
So I never really got any feedback from that level.
You never got one of those legendary brief notes from Jack Williams?
No, never.
See, what was so superb about him, if you, at a faculty meeting, ask an appropriate question,
Or if he saw that you had done something splendid, you'd get this note that you'd want, and it was handwritten, you'd kill.
And for me, the epitome of all of this was I was the speaker at his inauguration for the faculty.
There had been no faculty involvement at all in his selection.
Wow.
And we were all just .
But then he turned out to be so superb and the inauguration, he'd come November 1, the inauguration is I think the first week in May.
How I got selected I do not know.
And at the end of saying what a great job he was doing, what a great start he was off to and so forth, I turned to Clyde Wells, the chairman of the board, and I said in speaking for the faculty, sir, I want to summarize what I've been trying to say.
Speaking for the faculty, not even a faculty committee could have found a better person.
Clyde Wells and the board didn't think that was funny at all.
Well, the next day I was walking back from the MSC and I heard this horn.
Yeah.
And this arm motioning.
Then I realized it was Jack Williams.
Yeah.
And he said, hey, that was great.
And he handed me the note.
Oh, no kidding.
Which said that.
Well, of course, that was a treasure of treasure.
Oh, yes.
All right.
In those early years, you thought progress was being made.
Yeah.
How did you think, as far as you were aware of what was going on at other major public universities, were we headed in the right direction?
Were we following?
Yeah, we were really,
We were really playing catch-up, but we were doing it at an amazingly fast pace.
My impression of A&M has always been that if you can finally convince the powers that be with the resources of the validity of your idea, boy, that when A&M gets behind something, they do it first class.
I mean, it moves.
And so we went from, like I mentioned when I'd go back to my national meeting, people hadn't even heard of A&M.
And now we're sitting here and we're one of the, Tom Magoon is our great, he's a director emeritus at University of Maryland.
He flushes out all the data from all the counseling centers, just extracts out the big 20 and we're one of the big 20.
So we grew up very rapidly, very rapidly to where now we sit with the Michigan states, the Minnesotas, the Ohio states, Texas.
Now, you're saying top 20 public or public and private?
Public and private.
Yeah, although the preponderance are public.
Yes, yes.
And that's big 20, not necessarily in quality, but in size, which indicates a lot, yeah.
And was there anything in those years, those earlier years, that you thought we should try to do that
Nobody accepted?
Well, I was always concerned with our lack of minority student enrollment because I had been at, well, East Texas State, it had a higher than typical enrollment of minority students.
Indiana University had probably
Oh well I'm not sure it even magnified or reflected the state's demographics and African-American students up north tend to be a different breed than down here and that but I know I would always wince when I would go and see friends in other places in Texas and they would make the writing comments about A&M's
you know, white, overwhelming white population and that kind of hurt me because I knew how so much was good here.
I remember the second year I was here I went to talk to the Black Awareness Committee and there were 40 black students and I remember saying, gee, it's good to see all of you here
Because I haven't had that since I was up at East Texas State.
And they just clapped and cheered, you know.
I mean, they must have felt really, you know, just very, very minority group, you know.
And my impression was some of the earlier presidents, not Jack Williams, but after him, I sense some reasonable lip service to diversity, but I'm not sure that I ever believed it.
Now, interestingly, Frank Vandiver did get me, bless his heart, a specific funding for an Hispanic counselor and an African-American counselor.
But I think starting with Bill Mobley, I began to feel more of an honest interest and commitment to that.
Because, you know, I'm always so overwhelmingly aware of the fact that this institution belongs to the public, the state of Texas.
And I know it has vested interest groups, alumni and legacy groups.
But it always seemed to me that we should have been doing a little more a little earlier.
Sometimes, too, though, I also think that you've got to take those things slow when you begin to change a culture.
If you do it too abruptly, rough things happen.
And I've always been an evolutionary on this campus.
I've known people on the faculty who were revolutionaries.
They did wonderful things.
They carried the banner.
They were slaughtered, died, left, moved on.
I was grateful for what they did, and I reaped their benefits because I'm an evolutionary.
I'm a quiet persister, like with psychiatric services.
I try to be very civil, but I'm kind of like herpes.
I won't go away.
I keep coming back, and I'll keep coming back appropriately and at the right time.
And usually that's worked here.
How often, in all of your A&M years, how often did a minority student's problem relate to their minority background?
Oh.
Hard for me to, you know, I can't quote statistics or anything.
would be more of just an experiential feel.
I would say that it was a fair proportion of the time it had something to do with their racial background.
And how often was it because of some treatment they had received here because of their... Oh, yeah, that definitely happened.
Do you have any idea whether it would be better or worse here than other places?
Well, you know, present day, I think that probably the group of students who have it the hardest here are probably the gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgendered students.
The second hardest group I think for here would be the African-American student.
Those are the two that really, and we've had, I know, reported to staff all kinds of things.
I mean, sometimes the behavior is subtle.
Subtly discriminatory.
I mean sometimes it's overt like garbage being left in front of your door or feces or something like that Signs tacked up on doors
treatment in the community, but there are things that happen.
I've got a clinical psychology intern right now from the University of North Carolina who had garbage left in front.
She's an African-American Ph.D.
student, had garbage left in front of her door at her apartment complex at College Station in the year 2001.
Oh my.
Yeah, because I didn't think that was happening anymore.
And you have no idea of how our realities compare on a per capita basis with other institutions?
No, I just presume there's prejudice all over.
But I think my impression would be that this would be a tougher environment to crack because of its all-white, male, Texas conservative culture.
I mean, the African-American students at Indiana University were much more assertive, believed that they belonged there, that it wasn't a gift, that they had a right to be there, which was not the feeling that I got when I moved to Texas.
It was to some degree, you know, well, we're kind of lucky we've been allowed to, you know, but it was a very down, very much a one-down feeling, whereas up at IU, it was, you know, I have every right to be here.
All right.
Were you aware of any changes in administrative concern for the Counseling Center as Williams became Jarvis Miller, as Miller became Vandiver, as Vandiver became Mobley?
Yeah.
It sounds crazy.
I was never basically impacted by that, and I think it was because of John Coldis.
I was shielded, and again,
My own failings.
I never sought out to make an impression on a president or be political or schmooze.
I just never did it.
I tried to stay very professional and not make a big splash, not make a big scene.
That was almost from day one.
That was our modus operandi.
And I know if we had screwed up, we'd have heard something for that question.
But on the other hand, you got no directions, don't touch this, stay out of that.
No, I was never.
In fact, I remember we have a group of tapes, Haskell.
Right now, students can call in.
We have about 60 of them.
And they're three- to five-minute vignettes, everything from how to cue drop a course to how to fight fair and mad.